American Commitments National Panel (Ed.). (1995). American pluralism and the college curriculum: higher education in a diverse democracy. Washington, D.C: Association of American Colleges and Universities.
---------------------------

MULTIVOCALITY

The Association of American Colleges and Universities reminds us that diversity needs to be encountered "affectively as well as intellectually." (1995, p. 22)

Barad, K. (2003). Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an Understanding of How Matter Comes to Matter. Signs, 28(3), 801–831.
-------------

"What compels the belief that we have a direct access to cultural representations and their content that we lack toward the things represented?" asks Barad in a 2003 essay situated both within and against the science of knowledge and knowledge production (p. 801). Barad, K. (2003). Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an Understanding of How Matter Comes to Matter. Signs, 28(3), 801–831.

Barad, K. M. (2007). Meeting the universe halfway: quantum physics and the entanglement of matter and meaning. Durham: Duke University Press.
----------------------------

NICE QUOTE ON PRESENT/FUTURE/PAST BEING BOUND INTO ONE NARRATIVE IN TIME-STREAM

"The past is never finished. it cannot be wrapped up like a package, or a scrapbook, or an acknowledgement; we never leave it and it never leaves us behind." (ix, Preface) In this project, we are stepping into a river of time and story that is already flowing; we don't start it, and we are not separate from it; we're swimming in it. And in fact, we are not even "stepping into" it; we are already there, we're just choosing to start counting at this moment, and to put our deliberate awareness and analysis starting at this moment. Why now? Because now is when we are starting. Why not some other time? Because we didn't start then. We can justify our choices with all sorts of reasons, but the thing is: right now is not particularly more optional than any other time to do this study. These narrators are special, but this study could have been done with other narrators and other schools. I reject the notion of "optimality" and the temptation to defend my design as "best" -- I'm just trying hard to richly describe it as it is, so we can see and appreciate what is (and always has been) before us.

WE DECIDE THE BOUNDARIES OF OUR EXPERIMENTS; OBJECTIVITY IS A REAL THING, CONSTRUCTED SOCIALLY, AND SHARED

One goal of this project, as with all research, is to create and share knowledge -- which means we are assuming that there is a thing called knowledge that we can hold and pass along to others in some way. Whether we create it or discover it, whether it's directly transmitted or somehow transmuted in the passing-along, there is no science without the view that knowledge is a thing that can be usefully shared. How do we explain the way this happens if we are (as poststructuralists) dissolving so many boundaries of causality, observer/observed, strict replicability of procedure, and so forth? Barad's theory of agential realism can help.

Barad's theory of agential realism describes how objectivity is both real and a social construct. In other words, we have objectivity because we've created it by choosing to slice the world a certain way. (139-142) Barad calls this a "Bohrian cut" and describes it as the thing that "secures the possibility of reproducibility and unambiguous communication" (174). In the creation of an experiment, when the human observer reads the values of an experiment, they make that agential cut, saying: ok, here were the objects involved, and here's what their values were, and what they mean. (174-175) In this experiment, we can say things like: we choose these people as our narrators. We ask them to tell these stories at these specific points in time. Here is our tiny slice of focus out of all the millions of things we could have focused on. This focus is what lets us share, because we can only transmit a finite number of things to someone else (not to mention holding them in our own heads in the first place). To use Porter's terminology, the Bohrian Cut (CULTURAL THEORIES) is the shared language, the shared narrative (BRUNER) that allows us to transmit things across a larger society of individuals we do not personally know or trust. (PORTER)

WE ARE PART OF THE WORLD WE OBSERVE

These Bohrian cuts "enact agential separability - the condition of exteriority-within-phenomena," and provide the possibility for objectivity in the "absence of exteriority between observer and observed." Agential cuts also enact causality. Apparatuses are thus not just instruments of observation, but boundary-drawers that reconfigure the world. (139-140) I am spending so much time explaining these assumptions behind science that seem very obvious, because I am trying to make it clear how I am choosing to Bohrian-cut the world of this experiment.

We are making a different cut than most experiments (especially in STEM fields) traditionally assume. We usually cut the world between observer -- us, privileged researchers -- and observed. Even when we move into social construction of knowledge, or co-constructors of knowledge, we as researchers still stand as privileged interpreters; there is a wall we try to draw as clear, even if we know that in the messiness of life our subjects and us will obscure it -- it's like a manufacturing tolerance; there's a platonic ideal of precisely 35mm, even if we know that's actually plus or minus 0.03mm once the injection molder starts to run. I'm saying -- look, the platonic ideal is actually the unreal thing, the convenience that we've invented to make all this simpler. I'll use it, but I want to be very clear that it's a crutch and an imperfect model; this model is permeable, this sketch is drawn in pencil, and you have access to it. You can take and wrench and tweak it and engage with me, get in this arena and grapple alongside me. I have committed to standing in the long haul of this performance, but you can step in as fully as you'd like as well. I'm accountable, but we can all be responsible; I make sure the job gets done (and oftentime this means I do it), but the job getting done is more important than who does that job. Seeing these cuts as Bohrian is an important part of realizing this project is a writerly one to all readers.

The perspective of the project is performative, and like an open mic or open floor for improv, anyone can jump into the performance; observer and observe blend, are chosen roles, are borrowed and blurred. "Unlike representationalism, which positions us above or outside the world we allegedly merely reflect on, a performative account insists on understanding thinking, observing, and theorizing as practices of engagement with, and as part of, the world in which we have our being." (133) We separate ourselves from the experiment, and separate ourselves from each other, because we need to have some notion of 'observer' and 'observed,' but it's important to realize these distinctions are kind of arbitrary.

"In an agential realist account of technoscientific practices, the knower does not stand in a relation of absolute externality to the natural world -- there is no such exterior observational point. The condition of possibility for objectivity is therefore not absolute exteriority but agential separability - exteriority within phenomena. We are not outside observers of the world. Neither are we simply located at particular places in the world; rather, we are part of the world in its ongoing intra-activity." (184) The clearest way I understand this for myself is improv dancing. When you are improvising, you are not leaping about all the time. You can choose to step outside the circle of activity and sit in the side, but the audience is vital -- it creates a container of attention to witness the dance, and it makes a difference. There's no performance without an audience. So the audience is, in a sense, performinmg too -- they are performing the act of being audience members. And audience members can pull off their shoes and leap into the circle, watching while dancing. We just have the convention that says "the dancers sitting on the side are audience members, and the dancers on the stage are dancers," but they actually are all dancers (and all audience members) all the time.

Harding, S. (1993). Rethinking standpoint epistemology: what is strong objectivity? In L. Alcoff & E. Potter (Eds.), Feminist Epistemologies (pp. 49–82). New York: Routledge.
----------------------

WHAT SORT OF OBJECTIVITY DOES THIS PROJECT HAVE? WHAT TYPE OF KNOWLEDGE DOES IT PRODUCE?

This project creates "socially situated knowledge" (50), which is a puzzlement. "Socially situated" things are supposed to be opinions, because "knowledge" transcends local/personal agendas, ties, histories, etc. (50). (CONNECT TO PORTER)

GETTING DIFFERENT, "NOISIER" PERSPECTIVES IS A GOAL OF THIS METHOD; IT'S NOT NOISE, IT'S SIGNAL POINTING OUT OUR BLIND SPOTS.

Standpoint theory's viewpoint is that marginalized peoples see things differently -- they see more things more broadly -- than the privileged, who have a more limited view. And wouldn't a "bigger view" lead to stronger objectivity than one that excludes a large chunk of the world? (54-55) And wouldn't exposing both the reading and the writing of our research work lead to the possibility of stronger objectivity -- peer review and so forth, but peer review not just from us, but from our subjects, from the people they work with, from anyone who cares to participate in the world? Need to be careful that we keep the signal/noise ratio here, but also be careful how we determine what is signal, what is noise.

But "scientific method provides no rules, procedures, or techniques for even identifying, let alone eliminating, social concerns and interests that are shared by all (or virtually all) of the observers, nor does it encourage seeking out observers whose social beliefs vary in order to increase the effectiveness of the scientific method." (57) So we take our assumptions into the research and don't realize them, the same way medical research was done mostly on men and engineering research is mostly done on white men and we can't necessarily apply it to the whole of all humanity. The "noise" of this project will, at times, be signal -- signal pointing out to us that we are sliding into comfortable assumptions, that there is actually something here we need to stop and unpack. It is a slower process of teaching and unpacking and so forth, but I think it will reach deeper, involve more.

N^: This reminds me of a few things: the argument for diversity in design teams and examples like how cars are designed to be crash-safe for male and not female bodies, Barad's agential realism "cuts" between obesrver and observed and how we tend to draw the boundaries of "observer" around a small privileged minority of the human population, an article on how psych literature done on Americans has been generalized as "universal" whereas American thinking is actually the oddball compared to global societies (but we're the majority of those who "research" like this), the literature on sampling for qualitative reseach and how we could apply the same logic not just to "subjects" but to "researchers" as well, and Barad again in going "what's the difference between subject/researcher? we chose agential cuts that made it so." (BARAD)

Q 61: (rearranged by Mel) [Standpoint theorists are not relativists; even] if there is no single standard for deciding between competing knowledge claims, [there are] some social situations [that] are scientifically better than others as places from which to start off knowledge projects. (61)

GETTING OTHERS INTO OUR WORLD REQUIRES THE HIGHLY POLITICAL ACTION OF GIVING THEM ACCESS INTO OUR CONTEXT

Scientists never observe nature apart from such traditions; even when they criticize some aspects of them they must assume others in order to carry on the criticism. They could not do science if they did not both borrow from and criticize these traditions. Their assumptions about what they see are always shaped by "conversations" they carry on with scientists of the past. (64) So to get non-ENE folks involved in our research -- including using our research -- we need to help them step into our traditions, our conversations, give them a sense of situating themselves in that place... without requiring too much time to get in deeply, but perhaps only a sense of absolute presence for a while, and honest giving. And we should treat that dialogue as LPP, as something real that they do to contribute to the field. Not the sort of authorship we do, perhaps -- but a sort of authorship nevertheless. (DREYFUSS)

N^: Lots of threads in here! Barad's agential realism "slicing" creates subject and object, and that slicing is shared between communities by Porter's "long-distance communications technology" of numbers/quantization (another sort of objectivity view) so that the same slice may be used by people who don't know and innately trust each other as individuals. Where does the standpoint theory come into this -- is it a call to include more people in that society? (Maybe, but this sounds too simple.) Is it a critique that such a society can never fully acknowledge the marginalized, that only communities and personal knowledge can? (I doubt it.) I am also reminded by the "conversations with scientists of the past" thing of Barad's thanks to Bohr in the preface to "Meeting the universe halfway." (CLEARLY NEED TO WEAVE IN BARAD)

P 72-74: We can't say that starting from marginalized lives gives us more value-neutral research, because there's no such thing as value-neutral research; the statement that starting from marginalized lives is more value-neutral is itself a statement of value (starting from the margins is more valuable). We can't detach the "strong method" (of starting from the margins) from "strong objectivity" (which questions subject/object separation and requires reflexivity).

N: Val Aurora's blog post on ball lightning, http://blog.valerieaurora.org/2013/05/10/ball-lightning-the-coolest-thing-youve-never-heard-of/, has some nice references to marginalization of the perspectives of marginalized people; meteors and ball lightning are both phenomena usually observed by peasants and so they were both discounted for a long time (whereas when a nobleperson discovered the same thing, it was suddenly real).

GIVING OTHERS ACCESS TO OUR CONTEXT REQUIRES US TO BE CONSCIOUS OF OUR OWN CONTEXT

Strong objectivity requires strong reflexivity, consciousness of all the decisions you're making about boundaries, etc. along the way. (69) I strive for this consciousness here. How? Forced public rearticulation of it to others who come from outside my research world.

Baxter Magolda, M. B., & King, P. M. (2004). Learning partnerships: theory and models of practice to educate for self-authorship. Sterling, Va.: Stylus Pub.
---------------------------

PROFESSORS NEED TO EXPERIENCE SELF-AUTHORSHIP IN THEIR TEACHING DEVELOPMENT BEFORE THEY CAN TEACH SELF-AUTHORSHIP TO ENGINEERING STUDENTS

King and Baxter-Magolda's model of learning partnerships can only be taught by professors who have themselves experienced and internalized their three principles: (1) validate the capacity of learners as knowledge constructors, (2) situate learning in the learner's experience, and (3) define learning as mutually constructing meaning. (2004, xix)

Most written resources for faculty development do not apply these principles. Instead, they obscure the hermeneutic nature of their own text (BRUNER) with a readerly style (BARTHES) that treats the reader as a consumer of information rather than a co-constructor of meaning, and provide generalizable principles without urging the (now-passive) reader to put their learning to use in their environment.

Porter, T. M. (1995). Trust in Numbers: the pursuit of objectivity in science and public life. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
------------------------

THE USE OF STRICTLY CONTROLLED PROCESSES IN RESEARCH SERVES AS A REPLACEMENT OF PERSONAL TRUST RELATIONSHIPS WHEN WE ARE TRYING TO TRANSMIT KNOWLEDGE TO A LARGE, FAR-AWAY SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY.

Porter (1995) describes how bridging local communities of research into a global society of knowledge requires long-distance communication technologies. In order to scale, we've used mechanical objectivity to replace personal relationships. By adhering to strict scripts, formulae, and computations, we create a "highly disciplined discourse" that can "produce knowledge independent of the particular people who make it." (ix) "There should be no room for the biases of the researcher to corrupt the results." (7)

N^: Work this against the thoughts on "symbol" found in Cavallaro -- symbols are given meaning by their repeated use in different context, so if we share the same rules for the repeated use of (math) symbols, they will have the same meaning to us (for some value of "same").

N^: Work this against the personal trust relationships in the 1:1 interactions described by Sally & Borrego and fostered by in-person workshops and projects like the DCommons. 

THE MEDIUM WE USE FOR RESEARCH TRANSMISSION HEAVILY AFFECTS WHAT RESEARCH WE CAN TRANSMIT AND WHO CAN TRANSMIT AND RECEIVE IT; MY PROJECT'S USE OF RTR DELIBERATELY CHALLENGES OUR "DEFAULT SETTINGS"

How do we make knowledge more open, able-to-be-shared? Research depends heavily on the trust readers place in researchers to do solid, careful work towards the "truth." One practice researchers use to build this trust is the provision of replication instructions alongside their results, which supposedly makes all quality research "open" to "anyone." I disagree; the playing field for both researchers and research topics is uneven, the message heavily impacted by a medium that carries some things better than others, and carries it to some people better than others. Replication instructions are only useful to those who can understand them and have the equipment and time to work through them, and "acceptable" methods and instruments are ones that can be replicated over time and distance (Porter, 1995, p. 226-227). It's easy to see why qualitative research gets short shrift; it's less replicable, owing to the technical and ethical difficulties of transmitting thousands of pages of (often handwritten) notes detailing the intimate lives of other people.

This project experiments with the medium in order to see what happens with the message. How does our ability to expose our qualitative work online affect the type of qualitative work we think we can do? I am setting up a sandbox where these technical and ethical difficulties can be put aside. The data is fully transcribed and available online, and narrators have given their consent to having their stories told in public. It is a partial and temporary putting-aside. Internet access, English fluency, and leisure time are still required to interact with this research project. Pauses, blinks, and tone of voice are lost in the choice to provide only text transcripts and not audio or video recordings. I am ultimately the one who is hearing all these narratives firsthand; the questions that are asked are asked by me, and only the narrator and I witness the process of editing their story into a public transcript.

I try to close this gap of researcher privilege by limiting my analysis as much as possible to only draw on the "open" data of the project, but the gap still remains. This project not expose the private perfectly: as Bishop Untener put it, "We cannot do everything, and there is a sense of liberation in realizing that. This enables us to do something, and to do it very well. It may be incomplete, but it is a beginning, a step along the way." (Untener, 1979). Just because something is perfect does not mean it is useless. Through this project, I will expose what I can and acknowledge the limitations and fragmentation of what I do expose.

Untener, K. (1979). Archbishop Oscar Romero Prayer: A Step Along the Way. Retrieved from http://www.usccb.org/prayer-and-worship/prayers/archbishop_romero_prayer.cfm
-------------------------

(Quote used to illustrate the limitations of all attempts to be transparent and complete)
